An Update on Self-Driving Cars in 2024

Nationwide Vehicle Contracts explores the current situation regarding fully autonomous vehicles.
If you were to pick up an automotive magazine ten years ago, you could probably bet your house on it that it would mention self-driving cars in one capacity or another. 

The thought of self-driving cars had the industry totally gripped, and rightfully so. It’s a technology that is sometimes difficult to comprehend. 

However, in recent times, news on fully autonomous vehicles has gone quiet. In this blog, we explore the current developments regarding autonomous vehicles and what we should expect for the future. 

Tapered Expectations
Back in 2016, Business Insider predicted that by 2020, there will be ten million self-driving cars on the road. From a 2024 perspective, I don’t blame them for making this prediction. 

At the time, all the signs suggested autonomous vehicles were just around the corner. 

Since 2016, it’s been a disappointing eight years for self-driving cars. They’ve become entwined in a series of legislative red tape concerning safety and reliability. 

The State of Autonomous Vehicles
Now, in 2024, autonomous vehicles have gone pretty quiet. You hear a murmur here or there, but big news regarding self-driving vehicles is kept on the down low. 

This is because the technology is facing massive challenges, such as: 

Ethical

This big challenge facing autonomous vehicles is safety. Ultimately, the technology relies on machines making split-second decisions to keep us and other road users safe. So, who’s at fault if something goes wrong? Is it the car manufacturer? The software programmer? Or the car itself? 

There is no clear and right answer to this question. Governments from across the world have different viewpoints, which is tricky for those developing autonomous cars. 

Some people argue the best thing to do is let the car make an impartial decision. 

Legal 

Autonomous vehicles are a relatively new phenomenon, and consequently, regulations vary greatly from country to country. This makes it difficult for companies to develop self-driving cars internationally. For example, in China, the government is pushing for rapid advancement of autonomous vehicles, while in Germany, they are developing rigorous frameworks that are cautious but supportive of autonomous innovation.

Consumer hesitancy

Another challenge for autonomous vehicles is whether humans will actually use the technology. For nearly a century, humans have gotten behind the wheel and driven the car themselves, and as we’re creatures of habit, it will be hard to change this. 

This consumer hesitancy is being caused by fears about job losses, especially in the transportation sector, and concerns about trusting a machine to drive your vehicle. 

Recent Breakthroughs
In the last couple of years, the different levels of automation have become apparent. Level 4 is the level at which a human is no longer needed, but that’s clearly difficult to achieve. 

Level 2, which uses Advanced Driving Assistance Systems, and Level 3, which has conditional automation, have increased in popularity. Mercedes-Benz introduced Level 3 conditionally in the US in January 2023, with Nevada the first state to authorise. 

We’ve also seen a number of driverless taxi fleets increase in number, but this has been issued a setback after a woman was trapped under a self-driving taxi in San Francisco. 

It’s clear the technology still has a way to go, but things are looking positive. In December 2023, Mark Harper, the British Transport Secretary, said: 

“The technology exists and it works, and what we’re doing is putting in place the proper legislation so that people can have full confidence in the safety of this technology. 

“In 2026, during that year, we’ll start setting this technology rolled out”.  

Conclusion
Automation undoubtedly has a future in the automotive industry, but I’m still not convinced how widespread it will become. If the technology overcomes its significant hurdles, the consumer will benefit massively. 

However, drivers will still want to be able to take control of their vehicle if needs must. The industry must find a safe, reliable, and interactive balance. 